Welcome back everyone.
The date time index lecture often the time and date information in our financial data won't just be
in a separate column but instead it will be the actual index of the data frame.
Let's discover the built in Pandurs tools for creating the working for date time index.
I'll open up a new Jupiter note book and get started.
All right so to start off I'm going to do a couple of imports and you can essentially just fast forward
through these Or maybe you are even already have them but I'm going to import them pies and the Panthers
as PD and just in case we do any visualization.
I'm going to import that plot plotted pipe plot as Piazzi and again in case we do any visualization.
Let me just make sure Matt lib in line because I'm using a Jupiter note book.
OK now builtin Python libraries for dates and times actually exist and the one for Python is the date
time library.
So if installing any additional library you should just be able to say from time import date time and
this is Python's built in dates and time a library that allows you to create timestamps or specific
date objects.
So just to illustrate this I'm going to create a couple of variables.
I'll say my year 2017 and you can basically just make these up.
Also create a month will say the first so that January will create a day of the month.
Will say that's too.
We'll also create an hour.
You kind of get the idea here and the hour it's important to note is going to be in the 24 hour format.
That is something like 1 o'clock in the afternoon or 1 PM is going to be written as 3300 hours so my
hour is going to be between 0 and 24 there and then we'll have a minute my minute will say 30 and then
I'll say my second guess is say 15 seconds.
OK so a bunch of arguments there.
So if you want to use Python's builtin date time functionality it's actually quite simple you would
just say my date is equal to and then you would call date time and the thing to note here and this is
actually one of the complaints of Python's naming scheme is that this date time is being imported from
the date time library so it's going to be like Date Time Date Time.
This is a poor naming convention and a lot of people have complained about it but it's kind of really
built into Python a lot of things depend on it.
So it is here to stay.
Just keep that in mind that if you just say import date time it's not the same as from date time import
date time OK moving along.
I'm going to create a date time object and if you do shift tab here you should see the documentation
string and we can see that it takes in the year the month the day and then it has additional arguments
for that time.
So let's start off with just day information that has a date object and I'm going to pass in my year
my month and my day.
You could also just pass these in as numbers and all have to be variables but this is just for illustration
purposes.
That way it's really clear what the arguments are instead of just passing in numbers so that I have
my dates.
If I take a look at this object I have time that time and then I see 2017 January.
That's one and then the day of the year or.
Scuse me the day of the month.
That's two and we can see that.
Also defaults to zero hundred hours.
So it's important to keep in mind that if you can provide some time information using date time it's
going to default to zero hours and 0 minutes.
If you don't want that to happen we could just specify my date time and then set equal to date time
and I can actually just copy what's here and then I'm going to add an additional arguments to it goes
year month day and then you can add in things like our your minute and then your actual seconds and
after take a look at my date time.
It actually corresponds to the additional time information.
And notice here in this original line it just defaults to hours and minutes.
It won't actually keep providing things like a default second or a default micro-second.
Now it's important to note here is that this is not just a string or some sort of numerical object.
If you take a look at the type of this object.
So I'd say type my date time is a date time date time object and that's really important because this
date time object actually has attributes that you can grab from.
So I can say my date time dots and then if hit tab here you'll notice there's a bunch of things you
can do with it.
There's also a lot of methods but for now I'll just focus on the actual attributes and those are things
like the day or date so I can check out the day and it's going to be the second or I could check out
the month's And that's going to be the first.
And notice these are attributes.
I'm not actually calling here of close princes.
The methods in particular are just attributes of that actual date time object.
So that's the very basics of a date time object that's built into Python.
Now if this were going to be dealing with date time index so you're usually going to be dealing with
a time series as an index when working Panda's data frames obtained from some sort of financial API
or just reading in some CSB file.
Now fortunately for us pand this has a lot of functions and methods to work of time series data.
So first I'm going to create an example of a date time list or a date time array so let's just say first
to and I'm going to create a list of date time objects or say date time and I'll pass in let's say the
1st of 2016.
So January 1st 2016 and then I will also passen as a second item in this list.
Time and let's just say the very next day.
So January 2nd of 2016 I will run this and then say first to.
So here I have just a normal Python list the date time object.
So again check the type of this is the list.
So I have a list of two time objects and what I can do is then convert this into an index.
So as we know we can just convert a simple PI array or a simple python list to an actual index so I'll
say ditty underscore I A&E is equal to PD.
That's And those here are going to say date time index.
Just use tab to autocomplete.
And this is important to note it's not just an index call.
I'm actually telling Pandurs hey this is special date information not just a normal string or a normal
number so I can say the date time index.
And then I'm actually going to pass in that list first to.
So now if I take a look at the T I N the date time index object.
It's now clarified that hey this is a date time index and a lot of times we will actually have to manually
create our date time index in this format.
But in case you get some funky data you may have to do this so it's good that we go over it and we can
see here now is kind of format a little differently we can see the dates here.
And it says hey this is date time 64 bit with nanoseconds.
There's no frequency and we'll discuss frequency later on when it's because frequency sampling.
But here we can see we have the time index and let's attach some random data to it.
So I'm going to use any random randn and I will say two by two.
And let's take a look at that data.
So here we have a random two by two array.
And going to create two columns just Amby and then let's create a data frame will say F is equal to
PD that data frame going to pass in that random data created and then as my index into pasand ditty
underscore I N D and then I'll pass in my columns.
I just created.
All right so here we see our data frame.
And of course as a quick note you probably don't have the same for numbers here that I do because I
didn't set any sort of seed for a random number generator.
But this is the main format you're going to see a lot of our financial data and it's going to have the
index be some sort of date time object.
And then our actual columns will just be that data points themselves things like the price of a stock
or the price of the future that kind of thing.
So now that I have my data framed and its index I can actually take different arguments from it or call
different methods on it.
I can say something like DFA index RMX and if I report that back it says one.
So what does that actually mean.
Well it means the index at position 1.
And remember indexing starts at zero.
So we see this is zero.
And then this is one that is the maximum or the latest date.
And that is the second of January 2016.
And if you actually wanted the value itself you could say if in that case Max and this will return the
actual time stamp itself 2016 January 2nd and you notice he has no hour minute or second information
that we provided.
So it defaulted to 0 0 0 and if you want the earliest you can do the exact same thing so the index in
that returns the index location of the minimum.
If you actually want the minimum value you'll say DLF index men and that returns the actual time stamp.
OK.
So very basic here main idea is I want to get across is a lot of your data is going to be in this format.
And because it's in this format there are special properties you can grab from these date time objects
the special properties being things like just calling attributes such as What is the day or what is
the month.
Later on we're going to get a lot more practice with formatting date time and the CS actually shifting
it calling frequency sampling etc. but these are just the very basics.
And it's also important to note in case you ever get any errors of date time remember it's from date
time import date time.
OK thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.